PROTOMUCK DATABASE REDESIGN
===========================

This document is the authority for the database.  Where code and this
document disagree during development, this document wins until amended.

There is ONE design here, not a history of designs.  When a decision
changes, this document is rewritten to describe only what is now true;
superseded mechanisms are deleted, not kept alongside.


1. IDENTITY

   Every object has two identities, both first class, both permanent:

   UUID (version 7)
       The primary key.  Time-ordered, minted at object creation, never
       reused, never changed.  Stable across servers, suitable for
       merging databases in the future.

   dbref
       The traditional #123 number.  Monotonic: a freshly created
       object takes the next number, and numbers are NEVER reused.
       dbref recycling is abolished; the aliasing bug where a stale
       #500 silently retargets to a new object cannot return.  Large
       gaps after mass deletion are accepted and are a feature: they
       push developers and players toward UUIDs.

   Short-form UUIDs are accepted on input wherever a unique prefix
   resolves (like git), and listings display the short form.  Full
   UUIDs are always stored on disk.

   The garbage object type is abolished as a storable type: nothing
   can create or save one, and TYPE_GARBAGE survives only as the
   in-memory sentinel marking a dead shell.  The dbref keeps resolving
   to that shell (section 5), so no held pointer or stale ref can
   dangle.  Programs holding a deleted object are to receive an
   OBJECT_DELETED mufevent; that event is DEFERRED pending design
   discussion and is not raised today.

   RECYCLING IS A JOURNAL ENTRY, not a mechanism of its own.  The
   object's file is left exactly as it is and a layer records
   $core/deleted; the object is dead because its latest state says so.
   Every runtime function and primitive shows it as deleted at once,
   and its uuid stops resolving, but the dbref keeps pointing at it.

   That makes undoing it an ORDINARY rollback: at any revision before
   that entry the object was alive, so rolling back there brings it
   back, with its type, flags, owner, location, properties and source.
   There is no resurrection path, nothing to order against a tombstone
   table, and nothing written at delete time.

   A tombstone is created at RECLAMATION, not at deletion.  Once no
   retained marker can still reach the object (locked snapshots pin it
   forever), compaction removes its data and leaves a tombstone as the
   record that the dbref was used and its state is gone.  That is the
   point of no return: before it the object is recoverable, after it
   only the tombstone remains.  The tombstone itself then ages out per
   the @tune retention parameter, from zero to forever, default on the
   order of 90 days.


2. OBJECT MODEL: CORE PLUS MODULES

   There is one concrete object class, DbObject.  What an object IS is
   determined by the modules attached to it, not by a class hierarchy.

   DbObject core (present on every object, versioned, not modular):
       uuid, dbref, name, location, owner, flags, powers, timestamps.

   TYPE modules: PLAYER, THING, ROOM, EXIT, MUFPROG.
       Exactly one per object, attached at creation by
       Database::Create<T>(), immutable for the object's life.
       Exclusivity is enforced by construction, not by runtime checks.
       Typeof() reports the type module.  Containment state (contents
       and exits vectors) lives on the type modules that can contain:
       ROOM, THING, PLAYER.

   FEATURE modules: PROPERTIES is the first; VEHICLE is the canonical
       future example.  Zero or more per object.  Two scopes:

       global      enabled for the whole game and auto-attached to
                   every object (PROPERTIES).  Recorded in the
                   manifest.
       individual  attached to specific objects (a THING that is a
                   vehicle).  Recorded in the object's file.

   NO DIRECT ACCESS TO PERSISTENT STATE.  This is absolute.  Every
   read and every write of anything that reaches disk goes through an
   accessor: a getter, a setter, or a function that does the same
   job.  A setter records a journal entry (section 7); that is how a
   change becomes persistent at all.

   There is no fallback for a write that skips its setter.  Under the
   journal the top layer IS the unsaved set, so a raw field poke is
   not merely undirty, it is invisible to the dump and lost at
   restart.  DBDIRTY does not save it, because nothing walks objects
   looking for changes any more.

   Consequently the legacy write macros (FLAGS(x) |= ..., NAME(x) =
   ..., direct DBFETCH(x)->field assignment, SETDESC and friends) are
   abolished as writes.  Read facades may remain where they read
   through an accessor, exactly as CONTENTS, EXITS, and NEXTOBJ
   already do for containment.

   Module state is divided in two, and the divide is structural:

       persistent  what the module hands the database for storage,
                   expressed ONLY in the standard value model below.
       transient   ordinary members on the module object that are
                   never handed over and can never reach disk.  The
                   PLAYER module's session data, descriptors, and
                   output queues live here: on the object, found
                   through the same lookups, gone at restart.

   Creation:

       Player *who = database().Create<Player>(name, where);
       DbObject *obj = database().get(ref);           // boundary only
       if (Player *p = obj->As<Player>()) { ... }     // null if absent

   Objects cannot be constructed outside Create<T>, so nothing can
   exist without identity or indexing, and Create is the single
   gatekeeper where quota enforcement can land later.

   Modules are designed to be dynamically loadable eventually (the
   contract does not care whether a module is compiled in or loaded
   from a shared object).  Compiled-in modules come first; dlopen
   delivery is a later step.  Unloading a module makes its data
   dormant, never lost: see section 4.


3. THE VALUE MODEL: HOW MODULES PERSIST STATE

   The database defines one closed set of value types:

       string, int, float, ref (a uuid), and ordered list.

   There is no shared chunk pool.  Everything an object owns lives in
   its own uuid.json (with history in the .hist sidecar); the file
   pair is the complete, self-contained record of the object.

   A module's persistent state is a set of entries: namespaced key ->
   typed value.  Namespaces are reserved per module:

       $core/...      DbObject core fields
       $type/...      the type module's fields
       /...           PROPERTIES (player-visible props keep their
                      traditional paths)
       ~vehicle/...   an individual feature module

   PROPERTIES declares one entry per prop and MUFPROG stores its
   source inline as an ordered list of lines in one $type/source
   entry.  Entries are the unit of CHANGE, not of versioning: the
   object carries a single revision and its journal layers record
   whichever entries moved (section 7).

   The database journals, versions, prunes, and rolls back entries
   WITHOUT understanding them.  Modules alone know what the keys mean,
   and rebuild their in-memory state from their entry slice on load or
   rollback.  No module may define its own file format; this rule is
   what makes central versioning and module-absent durability
   possible.


4. MODULE DURABILITY

   Entries belonging to a module that is not currently loaded are
   dormant: the database continues to load, carry, journal, and
   re-save them untouched.  The object keeps its attachment record.
   When the module returns, its data is exactly where it was.  Modules
   stamp a schema version inside their namespace so a newer module
   build can migrate older entries on first touch.

   Type modules get the same durability.  It is acceptable to start
   the MUCK with a type module missing (no PROGRAM module, or a
   database containing a type this build has never heard of).  Such
   objects load as placeholders: they keep their identity, appear in
   find and match, and their properties stay readable when the
   Properties module is present, but every type-specific function is
   refused, and objects of an absent type cannot be created, run, or
   edited.  The stored type name and the $type/ entries persist
   verbatim through save, snapshot, and rollback, exactly like
   dormant feature-module entries.

   A placeholder always shows what it would have been and that it is
   not currently supported:

       #12345  TYPE: VEHICLE  STATUS: UNSUPPORTED

   The UNSUPPORTED status is computed against the module registry at
   load, never stored, so the same database booted with the module
   present shows a normal VEHICLE.  Type identity remains encoded in
   the legacy flag bits for now, for legacy purposes; an unsupported
   type carries a placeholder bits value (TYPE_UNSUPPORTED) in memory
   and its stored name is authoritative.  A better encoding than the
   flag bits is a future decision.

   Operationally: --db-exclude-type NAME boots without that type
   module ("program" is accepted for muf_program).  Container types
   (room, thing, player) cannot be excluded, because the containment
   lists live in their $type data and an absent module would strand
   every object inside them.  Dormant entries are self-contained
   values, so a convert with exclusions active carries them into a
   fresh root intact and loses nothing.


5. IN-MEMORY MODEL

   Lookup is owned by two indexes: a paged pointer table for
   dbref -> DbObject (a fixed top level of chunk pointers, 64K-slot
   chunks allocated on demand; resolution is two array loads, no
   hashing, no locks on the read path) and a hash map for
   uuid -> DbObject.  The page table wins for dbrefs because the keys
   are dense monotonic integers; the uuid index stays a hash map
   because random 128-bit keys have no better structure.

   There is no dense array of objects and no managed db_top: the
   allocation cursor only moves forward and chunks never move once
   allocated.  A dbref that was never allocated costs nothing at all,
   and a whole 64K range of them costs one 512KB pointer chunk, so
   the million-entry-hole problem cannot recur.  A DELETED object is
   different: its shell stays (see below), so deletion frees nothing
   until restart.

   Code holds pointers (to DbObject or to a specific module), not
   dbrefs.  Resolution through the indexes happens at boundaries only:
   MUF primitive arguments, player input, disk load.  Eventually MUF
   gains an OBJECT type alongside DBREF and the interpreter resolves
   stack values straight to pointers.

   Deleted objects are unlinked from the uuid index, but their page
   table slot keeps resolving to the tombstoned shell and their
   memory is never freed while the server runs, so neither a held
   pointer nor a stale dbref can dangle.  Holders can check
   isDeleted().  Memory is reclaimed at restart, where the shell
   comes back as a bare dead slot rather than a loaded object.

   Paging: the design must allow payload to be paged in from disk in
   the future, though today everything stays in RAM.  Two rules
   follow: all field access goes through accessor methods, and
   identity is always resident even when payload is not.

   Contents and exits are std::vector<DbObject *> owned by every
   DbObject (a default empty pair of lists on all types).  The old
   intrusive location/contents/exits/next dbref chains are abolished;
   a per-object position hint keeps classic head/next walks at chain
   cost.


6. ON-DISK FORMAT

   One JSON file per object, named by UUID, git-sharded two levels
   deep to keep directories small:

       data/objects/01/8f/018f3a2b-....json      base state
       data/objects/01/8f/018f3a2b-....hist      journal layers

   The object file records: the type module name, the list of
   individually attached feature modules, and the entries, one flat
   map keyed by namespaced entry name.  Object references serialize as
   UUIDs, including the contents and exits vectors.  MUF source is
   stored inline inside the object file, not in muf/<ref>.m.

   A manifest file at the data root stores the format version, the
   global revision counter, the next dbref, the globally enabled
   feature modules, the tombstone table, the @tune parameters
   (parmfile.cfg moves into the manifest; help files and logs
   explicitly do NOT move into the database), and the COMMITTED
   OBJECT INDEX: dbref -> uuid for every object that has a base file
   on disk, recycled-but-retained shells included.

   The manifest is the commit point, and the index is what makes that
   enforceable at boot time.  A file the index does not name was
   written by a dump that never committed; it is an uncommitted
   leftover from a crash, and the loader discards it (json and hist
   both) once the boot is known to proceed, exactly as the crash
   already discarded every other unsaved change.  Without the
   discard, the dbref such a file claims can be reassigned by the
   recovered world and a later boot would find two files claiming one
   slot.  A file the index names that is MISSING is damage.  When two
   files claim one dbref, the index says which one is real.

   A store written before the index existed loads with the same
   damage checks; the one index-based judgment it can still make is
   that a file claiming a dbref at or past the committed next_dbref
   is provably uncommitted (next_dbref only grows and commits with
   the manifest), and such files are discarded the same way.  This is
   deliberately not the pre-index behavior, which silently kept such
   files and grew the world past its committed top.  The live store
   was dry-run against the strict loader before this shipped.

   LOAD-TIME INTEGRITY.  The loader collects every problem it finds
   and then refuses to boot if there were any: booting past damaged
   or missing files silently regresses objects to older state, which
   is worse than not starting.  Damage is: an unreadable or
   unparsable object file, a missing or unparsable uuid or dbref, a
   file whose name does not match the uuid inside it, a corrupt or
   truncated history line, a legacy copy-on-write history record, a
   history sidecar with no base beside it, two files claiming one
   dbref, and an indexed object with no file.  Every problem is
   printed to stderr AND to logs/status; the serving boot detaches
   and closes stderr before the store loads, so the log is where an
   operator reads the failure.  --force-load boots anyway, skipping
   the damaged data, and still reports everything.  A missing or
   unparsable manifest always refuses: there is no committed state to
   boot from and no flag overrides that.

   The store format is VERSION 1 and it is the ONLY version.  The
   loader refuses any other format number outright.  There are no
   compatibility readers and none will be written while the design is
   in the prototype stage: when the schema changes, the store is
   deleted and rebuilt by re-importing the legacy flat database.  The
   format number is bumped only on explicit authorization, which is
   what marks the format as stable enough to migrate rather than
   rebuild.

   Loading reads the .json base and applies whatever layers the
   .hist holds, so a compacted and an uncompacted object are
   indistinguishable to the loader.  Cold objects have no .hist file
   at all, and a freshly compacted one is a bare base again.

   Writes are crash-safe and durable: write, fsync the file, rename,
   fsync the directory.  A dump appends layers to .hist and commits
   with the manifest; the .json is rewritten only by compaction.  A
   reader can never see committed state whose bytes did not reach the
   platter.

   Flat-file support is stripped from the server.  A converter class
   (absorbing the old db_read machinery) performs one-way import of
   the old NeonMuck V2 format, minting UUIDs during load.


7. VERSIONING: THE JOURNAL

   STATUS: implemented.  Amend this document before deviating.

   One global 64-bit revision counter, incremented by one per
   snapshot, shared by whole-database snapshots and single-object
   snapshots.  A global snapshot records a marker in the manifest; a
   single-object snapshot records a marker only in that object's
   file.

   ONE REVISION PER OBJECT, covering every field.  Properties are not
   special: core fields, type-module fields, feature-module entries
   and properties all version together under one number, each keyed
   by its namespaced entry name.  There are no per-entry revision
   stamps and no per-field version history.

   An object's stored state is a base plus a stack of journal layers:

       base       the object's full state as of some revision, held
                  in its .json file on disk.  NOT resident in memory.
       layer N    every change made during era N: entry key -> new
                  value, or a removal mark.  Layers stack in era
                  order.
       cache      base with every layer applied: the current state.
                  This is the live in-memory object, exactly the
                  structure the server uses today.

   Reading is unchanged.  The cache IS the object the game sees, so
   property reads, propdir walks, and every legacy accessor keep
   working at present speed with no layer traversal and no
   indirection.  The journal is invisible to readers.

   Writing goes to two places: the cache is mutated as it is today,
   and the change is recorded in the TOP layer.  Recording NAMES the
   entry rather than copying its value; the value is materialized when
   the layer is sealed, through the same serializer that writes the
   base.  That is deliberate: it means there is exactly one definition
   of what an entry looks like on disk, so a change persisted through
   the journal and the same change captured in a full save cannot
   drift into two encodings.  The cost is that sealing is a
   serialization per changed entry rather than a pointer swap, which
   is proportional to what changed and never to object size or
   database size.  --verify-entries audits the two against each other.

   A key touched ten thousand times in one era is one set member, so a
   property ticked in a loop costs one entry.  A write that does not
   change the value records nothing: every setter compares first.
   Removing an entry records a removal, written as a null, so a read
   below that era still sees the old value and a current read does
   not.

   Recording also adds the object to a dirty index, and firing walks
   that index rather than every slot in the database, so a dump costs
   what changed rather than what exists.

   The top layer is therefore also the unsaved set: it replaces the
   OBJECT_CHANGED dirty flag entirely.  @stats counts an object as
   unsaved when its top layer is non-empty.

   This is why section 2's no-direct-access rule is absolute: a write
   that does not pass through a setter records no layer entry, and a
   change with no layer entry is never written to disk.  There is no
   sweep to catch it.

   History grows with eras x entries-actually-changed, never with
   write volume.

   Reading at revision R: the base with every layer up to R applied.

   Retention is the ladder of section 7.2: hourly, daily, weekly,
   monthly tiers, each keeping a bounded number of snapshots.  A
   marker can be locked; locked markers never age out.  Use case:
   lock a snapshot of one program before a risky edit, roll back if
   needed.  Layers a retained marker still needs are kept; the rest
   merge into the base (see compaction, 7.1).

   Only entries are versioned.  Transient module state has no journal
   and no revs.


7.1 THREADED PERSISTENCE: FIRE, THEN WRITE BEHIND THE GAME

   Firing a snapshot must be cheap and persisting it must happen
   behind the game.  Fork-based dumping approximated that by letting
   the kernel copy-on-write the address space; it cannot survive
   threads, because forking a multithreaded process freezes foreign
   locks in the child.  This design replaces it, and replaces the
   synchronous flush that @dump and @snapshot perform today.


   WHY THIS IS THREAD SAFE WITHOUT LOCKS

   Only the top layer is mutable, and only the game thread touches
   it.  Everything else is frozen: the base is a file, and a sealed
   layer is never modified again by anyone.  The dump thread reads
   nothing that can change under it, so there are no object locks, no
   torn strings, no copy of the world, and no pause while a dump
   runs.

   Roles:

   Game thread    the only mutator.  Owns the cache and the top
                  layer.  Fires captures.  NEVER writes the store.
   Dump thread    one long-lived worker; the ONLY writer to the store
                  during normal operation.  Consumes sealed layers.
                  NEVER touches a live object.


   FIRING

   @snapshot and @dump both fire.  Firing is:

       1. Seal the top layer on every object that has one.
       2. Start a fresh empty top layer.
       3. Bump the era; record the marker if this was a snapshot.
       4. Snapshot the manifest payload (tune parms, tombstone
          table, marker list, next dbref) and the revision as of
          this instant.
       5. Hand the sealed set to the persist queue and return.

   No disk I/O and no walk of the database: firing serializes only the
   entries that actually changed, on the objects the dirty index
   names.  The command returns immediately.  Measured on the real
   GinkoMUCK database of 7950 objects: a dump with 20 changed objects
   returns in 17ms and a snapshot in 4ms.  An idle dump costs 53ms,
   all of it the manifest and the macro file, both bounded and
   independent of how many objects exist.  The committed index (one
   line per object) would break that bound if it were rebuilt per
   fire, and measurably did on a 100k-object database (about a second
   of stall); its serialized blob is therefore cached and spliced
   into the manifest text, rebuilt only when membership changes: an
   object's first dump, or a reclamation.


   PERSISTING

   The dump thread drains the queue in FIFO order and, for each
   sealed set, appends each object's layer to that object's .hist
   file, then writes the manifest LAST.  The manifest is the commit
   point for the set.

   Nothing is read back, diffed, or reconstructed at save time: the
   layer is already the delta, so a dump writes only what changed.
   An object with three ticked properties costs a few hundred bytes
   of append, not a rewritten file.  A sealed layer is dropped from
   memory once written, since the disk now holds it.

   Sets never coalesce across a marker: history lifetimes are only
   correct if sets land in fire order.  Coalescing two markerless
   sets is permitted as an optimization.

   ONLY A DUMP WRITES.  @dump and the dump interval are the only
   things that hand work to the writer.  A snapshot SEALS, because a
   layer has to capture its values at the era boundary it belongs to,
   but sealing and writing are separate concerns: a snapshot's sealed
   set is HELD in memory and goes out with the next dump.  A deletion
   does not even seal: its entries ($core/deleted plus the clears)
   ride the top layer to the next fire like any other change, which
   is the whole of what deletion-is-an-entry means.  A mass recycle
   therefore costs nothing at the store until the next dump.

   A crash before the next dump loses those changes, which is exactly
   what a crash has always cost: everything since the last dump.

   The exception is a scoped snapshot, whose marker is written into
   the object's own file and therefore needs what it covers to be on
   disk first.  It syncs.

   A held set carries no manifest; the manifest of the set behind it
   commits everything ahead of it, so the commit point is shared
   rather than duplicated.


   DURABILITY

   Torn files after power loss have been a real problem historically.
   The write discipline is therefore: write, fsync the file, then
   rename, then fsync the containing directory.  A .hist append is
   fsynced before the manifest that covers it commits, and the
   manifest itself is fsynced the same way.  A reader can never see a
   committed state whose bytes did not reach the platter.  All of
   this cost lands on the dump thread, where latency is free.


   COMPACTION

   Compaction is automatic, incremental, and rides the dump.  At
   fire time (game thread) the retention ladder of 7.2 prunes the
   marker list, and the sweep picks the next batch of objects (the
   cursor wraps, so the whole store is revisited every few dozen
   dumps).  For each object in the batch a frozen WORK ORDER is
   built: its uuid, the sorted union of the surviving global and
   scoped marker revisions, the scoped markers its file should keep,
   and whether the object is reclaimed.  The orders ride in the
   capture set; the dump thread executes them AFTER the set's
   manifest lands, from files alone.  Decisions on the game thread,
   file work on the dump thread, nothing in between.

   What an order does to the files:

     - Layers at or below the OLDEST surviving marker merge into the
       base; the base's rev advances to the newest era absorbed.
       The base is written before the history is rewritten: replaying
       an absorbed layer over a base that already contains it is
       idempotent, so a crash between the two writes loses nothing.
     - Every other layer buckets to the smallest surviving marker at
       or above its era.  A bucket holding one layer is kept
       verbatim; a bucket holding several merges them into one layer
       stamped with the newest era in the run, recording covers_from,
       the oldest era it swallowed.  Rollback refuses a target inside
       [covers_from, era) and names the nearest revisions that still
       exist, rather than silently handing back older state.
     - Past the newest surviving marker, layers bucket to their own
       era, which folds the many same-era lines a frequent dump
       interval appends into one line per era.  Era is the rollback
       granularity, so this loses nothing.
     - The file's scoped marker list is rewritten to its survivors.

   Compaction is also where a recycled object finally dies.  While
   any surviving marker predates the deletion (its era is below the
   deletion's era), the object keeps its files and keeps loading,
   dead but recoverable by an ordinary rollback; the deletion era is
   stamped on the object at deleteObject and reconstructed from the
   file at load.  When no surviving marker predates it, the fire that
   notices records the tombstone and drops the object from the
   committed index, and the dump thread unlinks the files only after
   that manifest commits.  A crash before the commit changes nothing;
   a crash after it leaves files the index does not name, which the
   next boot discards as uncommitted leftovers.  Order matters and it
   is always manifest first, then unlink.  The tombstone ages out of
   the manifest later, on its own retention clock
   (tombstone_retention).

   -storegc is the same engine run over every object at once, and it
   too writes the manifest before removing anything.


   READS OF STORED STATE

   @rollback reconstructs state from files, so it first puts held
   sets on disk and waits: rolling back to a marker whose layers have
   not landed would find a world missing its most recent changes. That
   is a rare admin operation and the barrier is brief.

   Examine's snapshot count deliberately takes NO barrier. It is an
   ordinary command, and forcing a flush there made every examine
   write the store; an examine issued between creating an object and
   setting its properties captured the object's base before it had
   any. A marker not yet written simply does not appear in the count.

   The player-visible "dump complete" message is posted back from the
   dump thread when the manifest commits, so operators still learn
   when the disk is caught up; the command itself returned at fire.


   EDGES

   Shutdown and in-game @restart drain the queue before exec or exit.
   That drain is the only remaining pause, and it is where a pause is
   already expected; normal dumps no longer pause the game at all.

   panic() bypasses the queue and writes synchronously: a crashing
   world cannot wait on a thread that may itself be the casualty.

   -convert and -storegc remain offline and single-threaded, and pay
   fsync synchronously, which is acceptable at maintenance time.
   -storegc is the offline form of compaction: the same merge the
   background pass does, run over the whole store on demand.  Neither
   -storegc nor --verify-entries takes the conversion-mode exit save:
   that save rewrites every base and drops every history sidecar,
   which is a conversion's job and would destroy the survivors
   gcStore just preserved.  gcStore writes its own manifest; a verify
   run writes nothing at all, and is therefore safe against the live
   store.

   The forked dump (tp_dump_forking) and the THREADED_DB_DUMP ifdefs
   are retired when this lands.


   HOW THIS IS CHECKED

   The journal fails quietly when it fails: an unrecorded change looks
   exactly like a change that was never made, and a test that does not
   truly restart the server looks exactly like one that does.  So the
   checks below are part of the design, not an afterthought.

   --verify-entries  compares the per-key materializer used to seal a
       layer against the full serializer used to write a base, for
       every entry of every object.  They must agree exactly; if they
       ever diverge, a change persisted through the journal would
       differ from the same change captured in a full save.  Run it
       against the real database, not a toy one.

   tests/run_persist_tests.py  changes one object in every way that
       has to reach disk (name, flags, owner, location, home, value, a
       nested property, a property removal) and insists all of it
       survives a restart.  Every field it does not cover is a field
       that can silently stop persisting.

   tests/run_type_tests.py  boots from the STORE rather than the flat
       file, which is the only way to catch the loader losing state
       that the importer sets correctly.

   tests/run_crash_tests.py  SIGKILLs the server mid-write and insists
       the store still loads with every committed object intact.

   ThreadSanitizer over a workload that overlaps mutation with dump
       writing checks the claim that the dump thread shares nothing
       mutable.  A filesystem race is invisible to it, so temp files
       are named uniquely per writer rather than per target.

   TWO TRAPS, both of which have already produced tests that passed
   while proving nothing:

     - The server DETACHES.  A spawned process exits immediately and
       its handle refers to a corpse, so killing it kills nothing.
       The pid in protomuck.pid is the only real handle.
     - "@shutdown muck=muck" does not shut anything down; do_shutdown
       compares against tp_muckname.  A refused shutdown plus a dead
       handle leaves the original server holding the port, and the
       next connection silently talks to it.

   tests/muckharness.py exists to make both impossible: it stops by
   pid and refuses to start while the port is still held.

   tests/run_integrity_tests.py  damages a store every way section 6
       lists (truncated files, corrupt history, missing objects,
       orphaned history, broken manifests, uuid mismatches) and
       insists the boot refuses, that --force-load overrides, that
       the failure is readable in logs/status, and that an
       uncommitted leftover is discarded rather than refused.

   tests/run_ladder_tests.py  runs the retention ladder at
       accelerated time by backdating marker timestamps while the
       server is down.  The survivor set is compared against an
       independent python reimplementation of the ladder, so the two
       go red if they drift.  Also: the journal bound (no layer below
       the oldest survivor after a sweep), rollback refusal with
       nearest-revision naming, locked markers pinning, retention of
       recycled objects, and full reclamation with a clean boot
       after.

   tests/run_dump_stress_tests.py  issues 100 @dumps back to back
       over conflicting property overlays and insists the server
       stays responsive, the last write wins after a real restart,
       and a mid-run snapshot still rolls back to exactly the state
       of its moment.

   tests/run_perf_ab.py  builds the A+B measurement database
       (100,000 objects x 100 properties, plus twenty whales up to a
       million properties each) through real MUF, then measures dump
       stall, snapshot stall, examine, boot replay, and store size at
       increasing snapshot counts.


7.2 SNAPSHOT CADENCE AND THE RETENTION LADDER

   Dumps are durability only.  A dump appends layers stamped with the
   CURRENT era and does not advance it; six dumps between snapshots
   are six same-era lines, indistinguishable to rollback, and later
   folded into one by compaction.  Rollback targets exist at snapshot
   boundaries, because only a snapshot bumps the era and records a
   marker.  Dump often for durability, snapshot for restore points.

   AUTOMATIC SNAPSHOTS.  snapshot_interval (@tune, default one hour,
   0 disables) is checked on the dump path: when the newest global
   marker is older than the interval, the dump takes a global
   snapshot first, labeled "auto".  The effective cadence granularity
   is therefore the dump interval.  A game that dumps every ten
   minutes and snapshots every hour gets six durability points and
   one restore point per hour, with no operator action.

   THE LADDER.  Four tiers, each a keep-count @tune:

       keep_hourly_snapshots    72     one per hour bucket
       keep_daily_snapshots     90     one per day bucket
       keep_weekly_snapshots    52     one per week bucket
       keep_monthly_snapshots   24     one per 30-day bucket

   Every unlocked marker is classified by age into the finest enabled
   tier whose window (grain times keep-count) still covers it; within
   a tier the newest marker per bucket survives.  Markers younger
   than one hour are all kept, so a snapshot taken a moment ago can
   never be thinned; locked markers always survive; a marker no
   enabled tier covers is gone.  A tier set to 0 is disabled and its
   ages fall through to the next coarser tier.  Manual snapshots are
   ordinary markers and ride the same ladder; lock the ones that must
   outlive it.  Scoped (per-object) markers age on the same ladder.

   With the defaults, a store carries at most about 72 + 90 + 52 + 24
   markers plus whatever is locked or under an hour old: roughly 240
   restore points spanning two years, regardless of dump frequency.

   The ladder runs at fire time on the dump path, and one pure
   function computes it everywhere it is needed (global markers,
   scoped markers, offline gc), so every consumer agrees about what
   survived.  Because compaction merges every layer below the oldest
   survivor into the base, the ladder is also the journal bound: no
   object's history reaches further back than the oldest marker the
   ladder retains, plus at most the sweep period before the merge
   catches up.

   What thinning takes away is addressability, never the present:
   rolling back to a thinned revision is refused by name (see
   COMPACTION in 7.1), and the state at every SURVIVING marker is
   reconstructed exactly.


8. MIGRATION AND OPERATIONS

   Development happens on main; GinkoMUCK runs it as the live test.

   This is VERSION 1 of the store, and it is the only version.  No
   database predating the current schema is supported: the flat-file
   converter is the sole import path, and whenever the schema changes
   during development, Ginko's store is deleted and re-imported from
   the original flat file (data/neon.db).  That is the migration
   plan, and it stays the plan until the format is declared stable.

   Steps:
     1. DONE.  New format end to end: the converter class absorbed the
        flat-file reader, and the server loads and runs from the store
        thereafter.
     2. DONE.  The in-memory model is DbObject plus type and feature
        modules; the legacy struct payload, its union, and dbref
        recycling are gone.
     3. Versioning: markers, rollback, retention, the tombstone
        table.  DONE except the journal and threaded persistence,
        which are sections 7 and 7.1.
     4. Integration passes discussed case by case: MUF OBJECT type
        and the OBJECT_DELETED event (both discussion-gated),
        tunables fully in manifest, dlopen module delivery, further
        feature modules (VEHICLE as the model case).


=====================================================================
DEVELOPER REFERENCE
=====================================================================

This section documents the classes as they exist in the tree.  It
grows as code lands.  Everything lives in namespace MUCK; headers are
in src/inc/.


UUID  (UUID.h, UUID.cpp)

    Sixteen-byte UUID value type.  Acronyms in class, datatype, and
    function names are fully capitalized; this class sets the pattern.

    UUID::generate()              mint a fresh version 7 uuid
    UUID::nil()                   the all-zeros uuid
    UUID::SIZE                    wire size in bytes (16)
    UUID::parse(text)             canonical 36-char or bare 32-hex
                                  form; nil on error.  const char *
                                  and std::string overloads
    UUID::tryParse(text, out)     bool form of the above
    UUID::fromBytes(src)          16 raw bytes in
    u.toBytes(dst)                16 raw bytes out
    u.bytes(), u.setBytes(src)    direct access to the raw form
    u.toString()                  "018f3a2b-7c41-7e39-9f2a-..."
    u.shortString(n)              first n hex digits, default 8
    u.matchesPrefix(hex)          git-style prefix test
    u.isNil(), explicit bool      emptiness
    ==, !=, <, std::hash          usable as any map key

    Version 7 means the top 48 bits are a millisecond timestamp:
    uuids sort by creation time.  Objects minted in the same
    millisecond (everything in a bulk import) share a long prefix, so
    DISPLAY short forms may need more digits; matchesPrefix handles
    any length.

    A uuid held in flight is a UUID, never a string: strings appear
    only at the JSON and user-input boundaries.


Database identity  (Database.h)

    database().UUIDOf(ref)        uuid for a dbref (nil if invalid)
    database().refOf(uuid)        dbref for a uuid (NOTHING if none)
    database().assignUUID(r, u)   bind identity (loader/importer only)
    database().resolveUUIDPrefix(s)
                                  unique-prefix lookup; NOTHING or
                                  AMBIGUOUS on failure

    newObject() mints a fresh uuid and takes the next monotonic
    dbref.  dbrefs are never reused, so a uuid is bound to its slot
    for the life of the database.


ObjectStore  (ObjectStore.h, ObjectStore.cpp)

    The only database write path.  Layout:

        <root>/manifest.json
        <root>/objects/aa/bb/<uuid>.json    base state
        <root>/objects/aa/bb/<uuid>.hist    journal layers

    ObjectStore::isStore(path)    manifest present?
    store().setRoot(path)         bind the data root
    store().saveAll(dirtyOnly)    write manifest + objects; dirtyOnly
                                  skips unchanged objects (forced full
                                  into a fresh root)
    store().loadAll()             read an entire store
    store().saveObject(ref)       write one object
    store().removeObject(ref)     delete one object's files outright
    store().rollbackObject(ref, rev)
                                  reconstruct an object as of a
                                  revision, including bringing back
                                  one that was recycled after it
    store().fire()                seal every changed object's layer
    store().hold(set)             keep a sealed set for the next dump
    store().flushHeld(set)        hand everything held to the writer
    store().syncNow()             flush held work and wait for it
    store().snapshotGlobal/snapshotObject
    store().globalMarkers/objectMarkers/snapshotSummary
    store().gcStore()             offline maintenance pass

    Object file schema:

        uuid, dbref, type         identity; type is the type module
                                  name: room, thing, exit, player,
                                  muf_program
        modules                   individually attached feature
                                  modules (empty for now: PROPERTIES
                                  is global and lives in the manifest)
        entries                   the whole object, as namespaced key
                                  -> {type, value, flags, rev}:

                                    $core/name, location, owner,
                                        flags, powers, ts
                                    $type/dropto, home, value,
                                        pennies, password, contents,
                                        exits, dests, source
                                    /...     properties, keyed by
                                             their full slash path
                                    ~name/... feature modules

        markers                   this object's own snapshot markers

    Every key is spelled out: the store lives on compressed
    filesystems, so abbreviations save nothing.

    Encodings and rules:

        refs        uuid string, or negative integer for the NOTHING,
                    AMBIGUOUS, HOME, NIL sentinels
        strings     latin-1 encoded losslessly to UTF-8 and back
        props       values the flat format never persisted (zero int,
                    empty string, NOTHING ref, TRUE_BOOLEXP lock) are
                    skipped; the compression flag is stripped and
                    values always stored uncompressed; prop refs
                    serialize as dbref integers
        lists       contents and exits serialize as ordered uuid
                    lists validated against legacy chain corruption
                    (location must equal container; one membership
                    per object per save)
        writes      content to <file>.tmp, fsync, atomic rename,
                    fsync the directory

    Loading is two-phase: phase one creates every object and assigns
    identity, phase two wires refs, containment, and props (lock props
    parse by dbref and need every target to exist).  Phase one must
    leave links NOTHING; phase two only wires.  Do not reorder this.


FlatFileConverter  (FlatFileConverter.h, FlatFileConverter.cpp)

    flatConverter().import(f)     read a legacy flat dump, minting
                                  uuids; returns top dbref or -1

    One-way.  Nothing in the tree can write the flat format.  The
    server auto-detects: a store root loads through ObjectStore, a
    flat file imports and the first dump writes the store.  Offline:

        protomuck -convert data/old.db data/store


ProgramStore  (ProgramStore.h)

    programs().sourceLines(ref)   authoritative source, or null
    programs().setSourceLines(ref, lines)
    programs().dropSource(ref)

    The in-memory cache is authoritative; the object store serializes
    it inside the program's file.  There is NO muf/<ref>.m fallback:
    the flat converter reads that directory once at import and
    nothing else in the tree touches it.


DbObject and modules  (DbObject.h, Modules.h, DbObject.cpp)

    The modernized object model.  The storage flip is done: type and
    feature modules own their own data, and what remains of struct
    object is the core record embedded in DbObject.

    DbObject core:
        obj->uuid(), obj->ref()             identity
        obj->name(), obj->setName(s)
        obj->location()                     DbObject pointers, not refs
        obj->owner(), obj->setOwner(o)
        obj->isDeleted()
        obj->typeName()                     "room", "player", ...

    Module access:
        obj->As<Player>()                   null if not that type
        obj->Get<Properties>()              any attached module
        obj->attach(make_unique<T>())       feature modules

    Lookup and creation:
        database().get(ref)                 shell for a dbref (lazy,
                                            stable pointer, null if
                                            invalid)
        database().get(uuid)
        database().Create<Thing>(name, owner)
                                            the single creation
                                            gatekeeper; module
                                            constructors own their own
                                            defaults

    Type modules: Room (dropTo), Thing (home, value), Player (home,
    pennies, checkPassword, setPassword), Exit (destinations),
    MufProgram (source).  Room, Thing, Player derive from Container
    (contents(), exits(), returned as vectors of DbObject pointers).
    Calling exits() on an Exit is a compile error by construction.

    Feature modules: Properties, auto-attached to every object unless
    excluded for the boot.  It owns the object's root propdir
    (root(), a PropertyTree) and offers a typed veneer over it:
    getString, getInt, getFloat, getRef, setString, setInt, remove,
    exists.  Property integers are 64-bit (MUFINT) end to end.  Full
    design: docs/PROPERTIES.txt.

    Migration pattern, still the rule for whatever legacy remains:
    pick a cluster (a struct field family or free-function group),
    give the module the method, repoint the call sites, delete the
    legacy declarations.


ENGINE INTERNALS  (Database.h, Database.cpp)

    The contiguous object array and its realloc allocator are GONE.

    Storage:  every object is an individually heap-allocated DbObject,
    stable in memory for the life of the process, which embeds the
    core record (name, location, owner, flags, powers, timestamps)
    reached through DBFETCH.

    dbref index:  a two-level page table. Fixed top-level array of
    32768 chunk pointers (256KB, static); each chunk holds 64K object
    pointers and is allocated on demand. Chunks never move and never
    shrink, so index growth cannot invalidate a concurrent reader and
    a DBFETCH in flight is always safe. Capacity is 2^31 refs; a
    20-million-object game uses ~305 chunks (~160MB of pointers).

    uuid index:  unordered_map<UUID, DbObject*> guarded by the index
    mutex (cold path).

    Threading contract:
      - object() / get() / DBFETCH reads: lock-free.
      - index growth (ensureTop) and uuid map writes: exclusive on the
        database index mutex.
      - payload mutation from ANY new threaded code: hold the object
        lock. DbObject::lockExclusive/lockShared, or RAII:
            MUCK::DbObject::ExclusiveLock hold(obj);
        Locks are striped (1024 shared_mutexes keyed by ref) so object
        count does not multiply lock memory; two objects on the same
        stripe simply contend, they never deadlock from stripe
        sharing alone. Lock ordering rule: when taking two object
        locks, take the lower ref first.
      - the legacy single-threaded main loop predates the contract and
        is exempt by convention; everything it calls is on the main
        thread.
      - the dump thread (section 7.1) never touches a live object at
        all: it reads only sealed journal layers and files, so it
        takes no object locks and cannot race a mutation.

    Files:
      Database.cpp     the engine only: identity, index, lifecycle,
                       typed creation. Wrapped in namespace MUCK.
      DbObject.cpp     DbObject core and all module view accessors.
      LegacyDbIO.cpp   quarantined legacy free helpers (macro-file io,
                       parse_dbref, number/ifloat, autostart, wizard
                       level checks). Nothing new may call these; each
                       migrates to its proper class in later sections.
      FlatFileConverter.cpp
                       owns EVERYTHING that understands the old flat
                       format, including its reading helpers. One way,
                       import only.


DELETION AND TOMBSTONES

    dbref recycling is ABOLISHED. newObject always takes the next
    monotonic ref; the recycle chain and the TYPE_GARBAGE reuse path
    no longer exist anywhere in the tree.

    Database::deleteObject(victim, deleter) is the single deletion
    gatekeeper, called from recycle_object after the object is emptied.
    It does two things and nothing else:

        - records $core/deleted in the journal (when, and by whom)
        - retires the uuid from the index

    Nothing is written and nothing is destroyed. The object's file is
    untouched, and the entry reaches disk with the next dump like any
    other change.

    The OBJECT_DELETED mufevent is DEFERRED pending design
    discussion; its broadcast is commented out, not removed.

    The slot itself remains a dead shell forever: legacy code sees
    TYPE_GARBAGE (and skips it, as it always has); nothing can ever
    occupy that dbref again.

    Bringing one back is not a special operation. @rollback obj=rev to
    any revision before the deletion entry restores the object, since
    at that revision it was simply alive; rollback puts back its type,
    flags, owner, location, properties and source.

    A tombstone (uuid, dbref, deleted_at, deleted_by, deleted_rev)
    appears only when compaction finally reclaims the data, and it is
    the record that the dbref was used and its state no longer exists.
    Before that the object is recoverable; after it, only the
    tombstone remains. Tombstones age out per the tombstone_retention
    @tune parameter (days; -1 keeps forever, 0 keeps none, default
    90).


VERSIONING COMMANDS  (@snapshot, @rollback, -storegc)

    These behave exactly as described and are not changed by the
    journal landing; only the mechanism underneath them changes.

    @snapshot                global snapshot (arch only)
    @snapshot =label         labeled (note the space; the command
                             parser needs a left-hand argument slot)
    @snapshot obj=label      one object
    @snapshot obj=lbl!lock   locked marker: never ages out
    @snapshot #list          list global markers
    @snapshot obj=#list      list an object's markers (works on a
                             dead shell through its tombstone)
    @rollback obj=rev        restore name, props, program source as of
                             that revision (containment stays live)
    @rollback #deadref=rev   a recycled object is not a special case:
                             rolling back past its deletion entry
                             brings it back, in its own slot

    A marker captures the current era and advances it, so writes
    after a snapshot belong to the next era and a read at the marker
    excludes them. History lives in per-object .hist files, one JSON
    object per line, each carrying a value and its [from, to)
    lifetime. Unlocked markers age out per the snapshot_retention
    @tune parameter (days; -1 forever). Examine shows the rollback
    points: "Snapshots: N available (oldest date)".

    protomuck -storegc <store> <store> is the offline compactor: it
    walks the whole store at maintenance time and drops history no
    retained marker can see.

    Dormant module data: entries in namespaces no loaded module claims
    ride through load and save verbatim, so unloading a module can
    never destroy its data.

    Manifest carries the @tune parameters; on store boots the manifest
    is the tune authority (parmfile.cfg remains a bootstrap fallback
    and ops export). UUIDs: examine shows an object's uuid, and any
    run of six or more hex digits resolves as a git-style unique
    prefix anywhere object names are matched.


WHERE TYPE DATA LIVES

    There is no sp union and no raw type payload: type-specific data
    is owned by the type modules.

        Room        dropTo (raw ref access preserves a HOME dropto)
        Thing       home, value
        Player      home, pennies, password (through PasswordHash)
        Exit        destinations (a dbref vector that may hold the
                    HOME and NIL sentinels)
        MufProgram  the runtime plus the stored source

    Blanket-safe ref-level helpers (roomDropToRef, thingHomeRef,
    playerPennies, playerPasswordSlot, exitDestRef, and their setters)
    serve the serializers and repair tools, and return harmless
    defaults on an object of the wrong type.

    Memory-only state hangs off the same modules and is NEVER
    serialized: PlayerSession on PLAYER (descriptors, last descriptor,
    editor program, insert mode, read block, ignore cache), reached
    with MUCK::playerSession(ref); ProgramRuntime on MUF_PROGRAM
    (compiled code, entry point, editor working text, publics,
    instance count, static vars, profiling), reached with
    MUCK::programRuntime(ref).


CONTAINMENT

    Chains are dead.  Containment is two owning vectors on every
    DbObject (contentsVec, exitsVec), empty for most types; the front
    of a vector is the old chain head and arrivals prepend, so the
    MUF-visible CONTENTS/NEXT/EXITS order is unchanged.  The CONTENTS,
    EXITS, and NEXTOBJ macros remain as rvalue read facades over the
    vectors, DOLIST walks via nextSiblingRef with a per-object
    position hint that keeps sequential walks at the old O(1) per
    step, and mutation goes through attachContent, detachContent,
    attachExit, detachExit.


WHAT IS LEFT OF struct object

    The core record (name, location, owner, flags, powers,
    timestamps) embedded inside DbObject; DBFETCH survives purely as
    its accessor.  Nothing can create or store a garbage object; the
    TYPE_GARBAGE bits value remains only as the in-memory sentinel
    marking a dead shell (isDeleted).

    Every creation path (create_player, @create, @dig, @open, @action,
    @program, and the MUF creation prims) runs through
    Database::Create<T>; module constructors own their own defaults.
    Wizard levels are DbObject::muckerLevel and wizLevel, with the
    legacy MLevel macro family as shims.


REMAINING WORK

    THE JOURNAL AND THREADED PERSISTENCE ARE DONE (sections 7 and
    7.1).  What landed, in the order it was built:

      1. Accessors for every core field: name, location, owner,
         flags, powers, timestamps, and the description.  Every raw
         write site in the tree converts to them (section 2's rule).
         The write macros go; read facades may stay.
      2. A Journal on DbObject: an ordered stack of layers, each a
         map from entry key to value or removal mark, with only the
         top one mutable.  Every setter, in core, type modules,
         Properties, and containment, records into it.
      3. Fire: seal top layers, swap in fresh ones, bump the era,
         capture the manifest payload, queue the set.  @dump and
         @snapshot both become this and return immediately.
      4. The dump thread: one worker draining the queue in FIFO
         order, appending layers to .hist, committing the manifest
         last, with fsync-before-rename and a directory fsync.  It
         touches no live object.
      5. Load applies layers over the base; rollback reads the base
         and applies layers forward to the target revision.
      6. Compaction merges layers no retained marker needs into a
         fresh base, purely from files; -storegc is its offline form.
      7. Deletions: retire enqueues, reclaim moves into compaction.
      8. Barriers: rollback syncs held work before reading it back;
         shutdown and @restart drain before exec; panic() writes
         synchronously outside the queue.
      9. Delete what the journal replaces: the save-time diff in
         saveObject, the forked dump (tp_dump_forking), and the
         THREADED_DB_DUMP ifdefs.  OBJECT_CHANGED survives only as
         the marker saveAll consults during a full conversion write;
         nothing in normal operation reads it, and the journal is the
         authority on what is unsaved.
     10. @stats counts unsaved objects from their layers.

    The .json/.hist semantics inverted (base plus forward layers,
    where before the .json was current state and the .hist held undo
    records), so the store schema changed and Ginko was rebuilt by
    re-importing the flat file.

    Still open, and deliberately so:

      - Sealing serializes each changed entry rather than swapping a
        pointer, because the value is materialized through the store's
        own serializer to keep one definition of an entry.  Recording
        values eagerly at write time would make sealing a pointer swap
        at the cost of a second encoder; measure before trading.
      - The base is rewritten only by compaction and by conversion.
        An object whose layers outnumber its entries is cheaper to
        rewrite than to replay; nothing decides that yet.
      - Backpressure is not implemented.  The queue is bounded by
        memory and nothing blocks the game thread if the dump thread
        falls behind, which cannot happen at present dump intervals
        but is a real limit at scale.

    Editor text off struct line.  The MUF editor and compiler work
    on std::vector<std::string> directly; the hand-managed struct
    line linked list (newLine, free_prog_text, the line-splice code
    in the editor) is abolished.  ProgramRuntime.first dies with it.

    Discussion-gated, do not start without asking: the MUF OBJECT
    stack type and the OBJECT_DELETED event.


CONVERSION IDIOMS  (use these, keep them consistent)

        read:   MUCK::Room *r = MUCK::database().get(ref)->As<MUCK::Room>();
                ... r->dropTo() ? r->dropTo()->ref() : NOTHING ...
        write:  r->setDropTo(MUCK::database().get(dest));
        expression contexts use an immediately invoked lambda; see
        p_db.cpp for examples.
